[THEME MUSIC]
>>SUE MORTER: Given today's
ever-growing mental health
crisis, psychedelic
therapy is emerging
as an alternative modality for
bringing about profound change
when other means have failed.
In the treatment
of most challenging
emotional struggles,
especially trauma,
psychedelics have been shown
to have exceptional efficacy.
Our guest today, Daniel
McQueen, and his Center
for Medicinal Mindfulness,
have become established leaders
of the movement to provide safe
and legal psychedelic medicine
experiences for personal
and global healing
and transformation.
Daniel, thanks so much for
being here with us today.
>>DANIEL MCQUEEN: Thank
you for having me, Dr. Sue.
Appreciate it.
>>SUE: So tell us
about your background.
How did you come
to do this work?
>>MCQUEEN: Well, I had an
interest in psychedelics
my whole adult life, and I was
part of some communities that
use psychedelics intentionally.
And I realized that
that wasn't enough,
so I got my master's in
transpersonal counseling
psychology so I could
study the psychology
behind these medicines.
And just my own personal
path of healing as well.
That was really
important for me.
>>SUE: There's certainly
a lot of curiosity
about this in our
culture today, and I'm
so happy to hear that
you are going about this
in a structured,
responsible fashion,
and that you can
provide information
for people in a safe,
administered environment.
So tell us about your Center
for Medicinal Mindfulness.
>>MCQUEEN: Well, we started in
2014 when cannabis became legal
here.
And so I also work out of a
yoga studio for large groups
using cannabis, and also breath
work as psychedelic medicines.
And we have a six-office clinic
here in Boulder, Colorado,
using ketamine-assisted
psychotherapy as well.
So I work with several licensed
professional counselors
and psychiatrists, massage
therapists, energy workers,
and other healers to provide
mostly trauma resolution
healing for people.
>>SUE: Wonderful.
So let's start at the beginning.
You mentioned the yoga
center and breath work.
And can you just
say a little bit
about how breath is
helping in this same arena
and tell us a little
bit about the effects?
>>MCQUEEN: Sure.
Well, we use a particular
breath work practice
that induces what would be
considered a psychedelic state.
And it's a very
somatic experience,
and it helps literally
shake trauma out of the body
either through trembling, or
even what looks like spasms
and convulsing.
And it's just a way to
reset the mind state,
reset the body to reach
a deeper homeostasis
and creates space for healing
that the body naturally
does anyway.
It's also a way to discharge
stuck energy in the body, which
also seems to be a factor
in post-traumatic stress
and trauma.
>>SUE: So I teach
breath work as well,
and I'm very familiar with
the beautiful outcomes that
can happen.
Can you share a little bit
about the specific types
of breathing patterns that
you're speaking about?
>>MCQUEEN: Sure.
This one came from
rebirthing breath work.
So it's a strong.
Inhale and a relaxed
exhale, but it's circular,
so there's no pauses at the
top or bottom of the breath.
And we found that big
breathing is very evocative,
but people can heal,
also, with gentle breath.
So it's the circular
pattern that
seems to be the most
important factor.
>>SUE: So can you just
demonstrate a little bit of it
for us to show us
what's happening?
Is it inhale,
exhale mouth, nose?
>>MCQUEEN: Through the mouth,
generally, but both work.
It's just more through the mouth
to get more air in the body.
>>SUE: And it's belly initiated?
>>MCQUEEN: I prefer the belly.
I feel like the belly breath
is more transformational.
When people do chest
breathing, it's
more of a confidence builder,
but that's a style that we use.
So it's just like this.
It's very simple.
[SHORT INHALES]
>>SUE: So it's kind
of a sipping in,
and then just a gentle
release, and over and over
and over and over, all of this
activating internal healing
energies that we're
going after, yes?
>>MCQUEEN: It's like
a charged homeostasis.
I like to think,
in spiritual terms,
of energy or chi
entering the body
and super charging the body.
And it just has to
break through blockages.
There's nowhere
else for it to go.
And so it can look a little
funny and a little different,
but that's just what
healing looks like for sure.
>>SUE: What other benefits
do you see happening
because of the breath work?
>>MCQUEEN: Well, primarily
it's like a break
free from stuckness.
So think of depression as a
form of stuckness or heaviness
in the body.
It can break that excess
stuckness out of the body.
It reduces anxiety.
So imagine anxiety
as just energy,
and it doesn't know where
to go or it can't leave,
so it can release that energy.
Trauma, as tension in the
body, can be released.
So any of the mental health
concerns can benefit from this.
It's very safe, so it
can be used by anybody.
But on the positive end of
the spectrum, good ideas,
inspirations, problem solving.
So sometimes there's
stuckness in life.
We don't know how to resolve
a concern we have a friend,
or something's going on at work.
Or in my work, I get a lot
of ideas in these spaces,
and I can then implement
them in my life.
So it's a way to
move life forward.
>>SUE: In a proactive fashion,
tapping our creativity
and genius.
>>MCQUEEN: All of that, yeah.
So it clears-- it
creates space for us
so that we're
light in our bodies
so that we have the
capacity to do these things.
And then it gives us
inspirational ideas and support
to step into what we want to do.
So to me, it's like a both and.
>>SUE: Yes.
Beautiful.
Daniel, what do you
think the relationship
with treating trauma is here?
Can you speak to
the mechanism there?
>>MCQUEEN: Well, it
activates both the fight
or flight response of the
sympathetic nervous system.
But it also activates the
parasympathetic nervous system
of deep relaxation.
So it creates this
charged homeostasis,
and it allows the body
to reset in that space.
And so I think, to me,
a lot of what trauma is
is just stuckness
is in the body.
But there's also stuckness in
the psyche or mental states.
And so what happens
is people are
able to resolve their histories.
Memories come back
spontaneously,
but in a way that feels
safe and supported and held.
And so the neurological
patterns that
get stuck in the
base of our brain
are able to reenter the
frontal cortex and complete.
And so that stuckness
that happens
there, which causes
a lot of the anxiety
and the psychological
symptoms, gets released.
>>SUE: So what is it
about breath work that
equates to psychedelic therapy?
So I just want to bridge
those worlds for people.
>>MCQUEEN: Well,
it's often described
as a non-medicine
psychedelic experience.
So if we were going to
look at the mechanisms,
it increases CO2 in
the body, and there's
evidence that's showing
that when CO2 is increased
in the lungs and
in the bloodstream,
that endogenous
DMTs are released,
and then that might be what's
creating the psychedelic state.
And so it's a way to induce
an endogenous psychedelic
experience.
And the experiences
themselves, they're
hard to distinguish sometimes
from a psychedelic healing
experience.
>>SUE: So if someone is to come
to the Medicinal Mindfulness
space, what might they
anticipate experiencing?
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah,
well we sit and chat.
I have tea or water available.
We just get to know each other.
We talk about intention.
You know, what do you wish
to gain from the experience?
And kind of let that
unfold a little bit.
I help them explore it
further and really get
to the core of what--
I say if something
could shift that was
really important in your
life, what would that be?
And we work with that
question for a little while.
>>SUE: So they kind
of set an intention
before they go into
the breath work.
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah.
And then we just do
some how to's and how
to do the practice, especially
if it's their first time.
>>SUE: So do they
tend to come out
of the session feeling relieved,
like better, or do they
get jolted by what unveils?
Or what, on an emotional level,
at the end of the session,
might someone be aware of?
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah, sure.
Usually they just feel a lot
more spacious in their bodies
and their psyches.
There's a lot of
realizations that come.
You know, yes, difficult
things can emerge,
particularly traumatic
experiences in the past.
Childhood memories can come up.
But it's usually
always in a space
of resolution and movement
towards health and healing.
And oftentimes, under
difficult memories,
there's always these gifts of
understanding or reframing,
self-acceptance, compassion
for all involved.
These are just natural
byproducts of the experience.
But you know, I
tell people to let
go of getting through
everything in one session.
So sure, there's some
things that are incomplete.
But then we just go back in.
A lot of encouragement
and acceptance
that whatever it looks like,
that's what healing looks like.
So I trust that.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Our culture could
certainly use more of that.
Let's take a look at one of
Daniel's breath work sessions.
[DRUMS BEATING]
[RHYTHMIC BREATHING]
Fascinating.
So they are mostly
just in the breath,
and the body is doing these
reactions, et cetera, because
of the exchange that's happening
chemically and neurologically.
>>MCQUEEN: Right.
You can see the discharges
happening through the legs.
But there's also this movement
in the hips that was more
of a Kundalini-type experience.
So it's clearing.
It's also activating
the meridians
and rising the energy up
through the body as well.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
And we were able to
hear the drumming.
And so was this--
>>MCQUEEN: That was
a live music set.
>>SUE: So at the
beginning of the session,
it's more kind of
rhythmic like that.
And what is this role of sound?
Can you say more about that?
We know that the
human system is made
of light and sound vibration.
We are energy beings.
And so these different wave
forms of energy and music
play a role.
Can you share your experience?
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah.
It's like there's a lack of
separation between the music
and the body after
a certain point.
People will actually twitch
or vibrate to the rhythm
and to the music.
And it's also used to help
stay with the experience
and then amplify the
experience when ready.
So the music will
get faster, stronger.
And we use it to match the
experience so that people don't
get shy about their process.
So if people start getting
loud, the music gets--
>>SUE: The music gets louder.
>>MCQUEEN: It's
like the music holds
the experience for people.
>>SUE: So I can imagine
that it gives people--
I know this happens in
the breath work sessions
that I'm doing--
that it gives people
this experience of a larger
version of themselves,
that they belong, and
there's this communion--
you call it community
breathing-- that there's
this universal intelligence
that actually becomes
a part of our own personal
experience, which tends
to soften our woes that
we're trapped inside
of in our individual
life experiences.
So as this is happening, what
is the role of the facilitator?
What is your role there?
>>MCQUEEN: Well,
fundamentally, it's
just to ensure that everybody
stays physically safe.
So we keep an eye
on everybody, make
sure they're there in a
breath that works for them.
So some people are
breathing gently,
and others are
breathing very strongly.
So we're just keeping
an eye on things.
Never had an issue
of anybody, like,
vibrating off their mat
or anything like that.
But you know, it's something
we pay attention to
so that people are allowed
to have their own experience
and know that they're
going to be held but not
interfered with.
And then energetically,
we move a lot of energy
through the space.
So when we do
these group spaces,
it's not uncommon for people
across the room from each other
to be moving the
exact same ways.
You'll see ripples happen
through people's bodies.
And so we're just
paying attention
to the energetics
of the space as well
and directing it all back into
the earth to be transformed.
And then if anybody needs an
intervention, we're there.
We're right there
with them, so holding
hands or reassuring
words, and just
ensuring that they know that
they're held and protected.
>>SUE: So helpful
for people to be
able to access something
that's rising up,
and to know this is a safe
space for me to actually connect
with this.
It can be done once and for all.
It can be complete.
>>MCQUEEN: Oh, yeah.
It can be completely be a
life-changing experience
in an hour and a half.
And we see this all the time.
It's amazing.
You know, people have
a visceral experience
of others in the room.
And hear each other breathing.
It's like they're supporting
each other in the practice.
So we just we just witness.
We bear witness
to the experience,
kind of be like referees,
make sure everything
is in the right place.
>>SUE: Right, exactly.
Can you share with us
some of the stories
of more profound healing that
has come from the breath work
sessions?
>>MCQUEEN: Oh, one
of our musicians, he
was coming as a breath
work practitioner
before he was our musician.
And he was in a
severe car accident
and had major back pain.
He no longer has back pain.
So whatever that tension
was, that gripping that he
had in his back, was released.
This was a situation with
cannabis and breath work.
But somebody's arm was so tight
from rheumatoid arthritis they
couldn't open their arm fully.
And one day, over a series
of several private sessions,
that room started to
shake out and release,
and his rheumatoid arthritis
went into remission.
So severe PTSD is something
that we see pretty regularly,
help heal.
So it's been an amazing process
to hold space for, for sure.
>>SUE: Now you also
work with cannabis.
>>MCQUEEN: We do.
>>SUE: And can you share
with us how you first
came to recognize the
relationship between cannabis
being used to help heal trauma
and its psychedelic therapy?
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah, for sure.
Yeah, so Colorado had just
legalized cannabis end of 2012.
And so in 2013, a
friend of mine suggested
that I consider working with
cannabis as a psychedelic.
And I'd never really
considered it before then.
Like I'd used cannabis
intentionally in that way.
But I never thought it would
be as powerful as a tool.
But I've training in
MDMA-assisted psychotherapy.
I have training in psilocybin
guide training, guide work.
And so I had all
these modalities
that were used in
conjunction with a medicine.
So we just used all
of those modalities
and created a protocol
and used cannabis instead.
And it worked really well.
A friend of mine who was
one of my first guinea pigs
jokingly said, if I didn't
know you and trust you,
I would have thought
you put DMT In that.
And so that was one of
the first real awarenesses
that we had that
something different was
happening than we expected.
I thought it would be, maybe, a
basic healing, like a training
tool, because it was legal.
We could teach with it.
We could use it.
But it turned out
to be as potentially
powerful as these other
classic psychedelics.
>>SUE: And what is the protocol
for using cannabis in this way?
>>MCQUEEN: We start
with good medicine.
We use organic
medicine, high quality,
potent, clean medicine.
And we blend different
strains together
to create these what
I call a full spectrum
psychedelic experience.
But it's the same setup as a
one-on-one breath work session,
but instead of doing
the big breath work,
when it's time to
begin the journey,
I invite somebody to use
a vaporizer so that it's
clean and healthy on the lungs.
And they take as
much as they feel
is appropriate for their
tolerance and where they're at.
And they can always
take more if they wish.
And then we either
have a conversation
where we're checking in.
And it's more of an
MDMA-assisted therapy session.
Or they're invited to lay
down with an eye covering,
like the video you just saw.
And they go inward, more
like a psilocybin session.
Again, play music.
It's not as evocative,
but it's kind
of across the board to
help facilitate the journey
experience for them.
And then at times,
I'll check in.
They're invited to
share their experience.
And those are more of
like a guided meditation
to help them stay
with their process.
Or sometimes they're
quiet the whole time,
and we chat about it afterwards.
>>SUE: So how is this
cannabis-assisted psychedelic
therapy different
from recreational use?
Just if we can tie that
together for our viewers,
I think it would be helpful.
>>MCQUEEN: Sure.
You know, recreational
use is often among friends
or go to a movie, there's
maybe art or music's involved.
It's playful.
It's creative.
Or sometimes the bad,
or the negative side,
of recreational use would be to
use to escape tension or pain,
like any drug could be used.
But this is to help us
turn inward and turn
towards our struggles and
turn towards our difficulties.
So it's actually the
opposite of recreational use.
And it's an invitation to go
inward and be quiet, so there's
no need to have conversation.
So usually general things
like social anxiety
that come up with cannabis use
don't show up in these spaces.
So it's a very intentional,
contained environment.
Even smoking is
done with intention.
So I'm not just giving them
medicine and telling them,
OK, just take this.
We say a prayer or sit in
meditation as people smoke.
So we're really working
with the opposite
of what you'd call a
stereotypical pot smoker.
>>SUE: So you're trying
to create a sacred space.
>>MCQUEEN: Always
create a sacred space.
>>SUE: Where something
conscious and intentional
can be revealed as a
byproduct of your approach
to the whole thing.
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah.
To me, this work is sacred.
So we acknowledge and honor the
spirit of the plant as an ally.
And it's there to help us.
It's there to bring
us back to ourselves.
And so when we treat it
as that, it provides that.
>>SUE: The biggest benefit of
using cannabis in this way,
what would you say?
>>MCQUEEN: Oh, 90% of my work
is trauma resolution work.
So I would say most mental
health concerns stem
from struggles in our past.
And we clear that
out of our bodies.
We just create space to become
more of who we already are.
>>SUE: So what
types, specifically,
of psychological
conditions do you
feel are the most affected
by psychedelic therapy?
>>MCQUEEN: Any anxiety
disorders is something
that we can work
with in this space.
And also depression is
very common in our society.
So those are the two big ones.
Obsessive compulsive disorders
and neuroses is something
that I work with quite a bit.
And so again, giving ourselves
an opportunity to reset,
re-evaluate, and break free from
that neurological patterning
that pulls us into those cycles
that don't work for us anymore.
And then over time,
even personality traits
shift towards healthier
ways of being.
But things like that take time.
>>SUE: How does this
play out relative
to traditional psychotherapy?
>>MCQUEEN: It's like a
compliment in a lot of ways.
So the preparation
and integration
could be considered
traditional psychotherapy.
We pay attention to
their mental state.
But the experiences themselves--
especially I've seen this
with my personal clients,
people who have mindfulness
practices already,
are already in therapy,
they can take it really deep
because they're primed for it.
But if they didn't have
the medicine experience,
they may not ever
be able to take it
to that place because of
just some innate stuckness
or a defense mechanism
that is hard to clear.
>>SUE: It softens the wall.
>>MCQUEEN: Softens
all the ego structures
so that they can look at things.
But also, it doesn't
just soften their ego.
Doesn't just break this down.
It provides psychological,
emotional, almost nourishing
support in the
experience itself.
So people feel very safe
when they're looking at it.
It's not just scary.
It's scary, but I'm
safe and I'm held here.
And so and so then they
take that realization
or that understanding,
and they bring it back
into their traditional
psychotherapy practice,
they're in a different
place altogether.
So I work with a lot
of psychotherapists.
They'll send me their clients.
I'll work with them for a
few sessions or short series,
and then they go back.
And then I see them a
year later or something.
>>SUE: And how does this compare
to other psychedelic therapies?
>>MCQUEEN: Cannabis can act
like all the other psychedelics,
so one session can be
just like an MDMA session.
Another one with another person
will be just like a psilocybin
mushroom session.
And then we're even
approaching levels
that are like ayahuasca
and DMT level.
So working with
cannabis, you kind of
have to know how to work with
all the different medicines
because it shows up just
the way somebody needs it.
Cannabis is special in that way.
And then also, specifically,
it's very somatically oriented,
where some of these
other medicines
are more dissociative,
or they're
in another space or
another reality, even.
Another difference between
cannabis and other psychedelics
is people don't lose
their sense of agency.
That doesn't mean they stay
in control of the experience,
but they're able to engage it.
They feel like they're a
partner in the experience,
whereas these other medicines,
they just kind of pull you
into it.
You don't have a choice.
You go where you go.
>>SUE: Interesting.
>>MCQUEEN: So I like working
with cannabis for that reason.
>>SUE: So can you walk
us through what happens
in a conscious cannabis event?
>>MCQUEEN: Sure.
Well, a lot of our work
is at the yoga studio.
We work with groups.
So we call them conscious
cannabis circles.
Everybody is
sitting in a circle.
they're on yoga mats
or some sort of pad.
We give an introduction.
We talk about
intention and safety.
I call it the flight attendant
talk, where you're just like,
here's how you do it and
here's where to stay.
And then we imbibe the
medicine in ceremony.
Usually it's acknowledging
the earth and the sky
and just taking the medicine
with intention and meditation,
prayer.
People are invited,
then, to lay down.
They're in Savasana, so in
a really open, gentle space.
And then I guide them through
a body scan meditation,
so guide the whole
group in a body scan.
And that kind of
helps with the jitters
as the medicine's
coming on, and they just
keep sinking deeper and
deeper into an internal space.
And then I play music.
I play music and just
keep an eye on everybody.
And if anybody needs
anything, they just
know to raise their hand.
And one of our sitters or
I'll be right there with them,
support them.
There's a break in the middle.
And then we do it again.
There's a second set.
At the end, there's an
invitation to share.
We have snacks and
juice and chocolate.
We really like to treat people
after these experiences.
And then people share
their experience,
and they're witnessed and held.
And some of them, they
share really big stuff
and life-transforming things,
and so we hold space for that.
And then everybody is required
to have a designated driver,
and they go home
for the evening.
We give them some tips on how
to integrate the experience.
>>SUE: Excellent.
>>MCQUEEN: And just keep going.
>>SUE: Yeah.
You took part in Gaia's
series, "Psychedelica".
>>MCQUEEN: I did, yeah.
>>SUE: And we have an
excerpt from that in one
of your cannabis circles.
So let's take a look at this.
>> Daniel McQueen founded
Medicinal Mindfulness,
which specializes in the
spiritual and therapeutic
application of psychedelics
or breathing techniques
in the Boulder, Colorado area.
>> In regards to
setting with cannabis,
we bring in a gratitude prayer
when we imbibe the medicine.
And we sit in a
circle, and we're
calling in energies and
ways of being that support
psychedelic journey work.
And this is far from--
like the exact opposite
extreme of recreational use
or unconscious use
or habitual use.
We're not just sitting there
feeling stoned or blissed out,
that there's some real
significant psychological,
spiritual, and
energetically healing
and life-transforming
occurrences happening
in the psyche and in the body.
And we turn towards
those experiences
instead of using the
medicine to check out
from those experiences.
>> By creating a
healing intention,
or a safe space to enter
deeply mystical realms,
circles such as these are
dismantling the negative
stereotypes and calling in a
revival of ancient ceremonial
use of this plant.
>>SUE: What is a
psychedelic cannabis blend?
>>MCQUEEN: Well, you know,
so there's no such thing
as a singular cannabis plant.
There's different
what's called strains,
and there's different
families of strains.
On one side, there's
sativas, which are elevating,
creative, energetic.
They can also create anxiety.
And on the other side,
there's what's called indicas.
And they're very body-oriented.
So people deeply relax.
Sometimes they're used
to help them sleep.
But they can be kind
of numbing, you know?
Like you can kind of
check out in that space
or go to sleep or
feel kind of dull.
But it's deeply
physically relaxing.
And then there's
a third of strains
called hybrids, which
are very heart opening.
They're hybrids.
They're in between
indicas and sativas.
So they're elevated,
but not too much.
You can feel them in your
body, but you're not droopy.
And so what we do is we
combine these strains.
And they smell different, and
it's the terpene structures.
It's like-- I'm assuming
you know a little bit,
like, essential oil therapies.
You know, like
lavender is calming.
That chemical is
found in indicas.
The chemical that
elevates the mood,
like lemon smells
or pine smells,
are found in the strains
that are elevating.
So we're combining all
of these terpens together
that create this really
advanced entourage effect.
So you get all of the
benefits of the sativas,
and the anxiety drops away
because your body's so relaxed.
And you get all this deep
relaxation from the indica,
but you're still
alert and awake.
You're not sleepy or droopy.
And so it's an elevated, hyper
alert, but deeply relaxed
space with the hybrids
opening up heart space.
And so there feels like a
lot of psychological support
and nourishment.
And within that,
the body shakes.
A lot of shaking
happens, or trembling.
I just did a session yesterday
where it was mostly that work.
So deep tensions
are released out
of the body because
of the indicas.
But the sativas are creating
inner visual experiences,
so people are seeing memories.
They're re-experiencing things
that are important to them
in their lives.
But they also might be
traveling through what
would be like a
kaleidoscope of color,
flying through the universe,
meeting allies and guides,
things that are
typically stereotypical
of a real psychedelic trip.
And so the primary difference
with working with cannabis
is they can take their eye
covering off and be right back,
and then put it right
back on when they're ready
and go right back into it.
And that can't
really happen with
other psychedelic medicines.
You're either in the
experience or you're not.
>>SUE: Very interesting.
We have Skye Weaver about
to join us on Skype.
She is one of the many people
who've benefited greatly
from Daniel's work.
Hello, Skye.
Thank you for being
here with us today.
Wonderful.
Can you tell us how you came
to find Daniel and the Center
for Medicinal Mindfulness?
>>SKYE WEAVER: Yes.
I was on the
medicine path and had
worked with a really big
medicine called 5-MeO-DMT.
And I was looking for
some integration tools.
I had been inspired
by that medicine
to really dive into
integration as my offering,
as what I could hold to
help support people prepare
for and navigate and integrate
psychedelic experiences.
And so I went to two of
the integration leaders
in the LA area, and
they recommended
Daniel to come and train
with Daniel, and also
at the Hakomi Institute.
So I just dove into
this work with Daniel,
thinking that it was just going
to be just cannabis, like we
joke around.
But it opened up a
whole world for me
that really changed my life.
>>SUE: Specifically, what issues
were you hoping to resolve?
>>WEAVER: I had had a
pretty traumatic experience
the first time that I had done
that, the 5-MeO medicine, so
hoping to heal some
trauma around that.
So a not great relationship
with the facilitator.
So really getting
in touch with what
it would be for me to
be in integrity, for me
to be a person who
can walk this path
and be of service
to people, like
who I needed to be in
order to hold space
for people in this work.
And I found that
through Daniel's work.
>>SUE: What were some of
your first experiences
within Daniel's work?
>>WEAVER: My first experience
that I had where I was like,
oh, there's something
really big here.
We were in our first training.
And I went to the
psychedelic sitter school
that Daniel teaches, teaching
people how to hold space
for this cannabis work.
And he was facilitating
for a woman,
and we were all sitting, holding
space in the space with her.
And I had my eyes closed.
And I looked down and I
could see my chakra system.
I looked up, eyes
closed again, and I
could see the energy of me
and all the other people
in the circle who were
all focused on her,
and then our energy that kind
of came together above and below
and created this sphere of light
that felt like we were just
traveling through the infinite
darkness of the cosmos
in this bubble of light,
holding, literally
holding and creating the
container for her healing.
Really, really profound.
>>SUE: Thank you, Skye.
I would love for you,
if you don't mind, just
sharing with us
what the trauma was
that you were trying to heal.
And the reason I want to ask
is that many of our viewers
have many traumas
that are pocketed away
that are impacting
their lives right now.
And if we can share
some of the things
that we have
transcended, it makes
it easier for everyone to
recognize that they, too,
can do the same.
Would it be possible for you to
share the trauma specifically?
>>WEAVER: There have been a
lot of experiences in my life
where my body was
used as someone's
outlet for their anger
or their frustration.
And through this
work, I unlocked
that I had an
experience where someone
had grabbed my shoulders
and shook me in my face.
And it felt at that
moment, through this work--
I didn't even
remember this memory--
but through this work,
this memory with uncovered,
and I felt my wings being
broken, my shoulders, my wings.
And this medicine
revealed that to me.
The cannabis worked
specifically.
And then I had an experience
at the next training,
the facilitators training, guide
training that Daniel teaches,
where we were trading
off sitting and guiding
for each other.
And my body became
encapsulated into the earth.
I was one with the earth,
like roots and moss
had grown over me.
And from within
the earth, I could
feel these roots or
these tendrils of energy
that came up into my
spine, in through my spine,
into my energy points,
into my chakra system.
I'd had some chronic
pain in my back,
and just this like
tightness in my body.
And I could literally feel the
medicine rearranging my spinal
column and hearing
it pop and crack .
And as soon as my
spine realigned,
all of sudden my body
just started to move,
and it literally felt
like unwinding, rewinding
the trauma and the tension in my
body, in my connective tissues,
in my fascia.
My body-- as I surrendered,
my body moved itself.
And through this medicine,
I've found my wings again.
I'm more open.
heart's more open.
I'm able to be more vulnerable,
to show up in my power,
to be willing to be seen.
>>SUE: And so would you say
that that is the greatest
takeaway from this
work, is that you're
able to reveal as the
true self in a way
that you were unable to before?
Or is there anything
else that you
would like to share about your
greatest understanding of what
has transpired here?
>>WEAVER: Yeah.
Yeah.
I'd say this concept of
the somatic psychedelic.
My theory is that the cannabis
works on the nervous system.
And so it really helps to
unlock anything that's stuck.
As a body worker and an
energy worker as well,
and a yoga teacher and
a cannabis facilitator,
this medicine has really
unlocked my body, my soma.
And through that
experience, it's
really been both an inside
out and an outside in healing.
And also, to be able to
heal my internal traumas
and my lineage, my
story, my family
traumas, the generational
traumas, to be able to, yes,
show up in my own power so that
I can show up for my family
and be the medicine
for the family,
for the tribe, for all of
those who I can show up for,
has really empowered
me to be myself
so that I can show for others
to be able to do the same.
>>SUE: Wonderful.
Thank you so much, Skye,
for sharing your story
and your process with us.
I know that it would be
helpful for many, many people.
Thank you for being with
us on "The Healing Matrix".
>>WEAVER: [INAUDIBLE]
>>SUE: Blessings to you.
So Daniel, what do you do
to help people integrate
their experiences
from the circle
when they move out
into their lives?
>>MCQUEEN: We just create
a lot of community support
around the experience.
So some people come
see me one on one work.
And then other people, we
do group conversations.
We have video conference
calls for people who are out
of the country or out of state.
So just a lot of
conversations and support.
So people will bring
the idea that they
gained from the experience
and try to implement it
into their lives.
And they're going to learn from
that, whether it's successful
or not.
And so we help people implement
those ideas into their lives,
and also help with
the consequences,
sometimes, of what they
remember or what they realize
about themselves, just help them
process it and work through it,
and coach people in having
conversations with the people
they need to have
conversations with.
And what we find is
that the healing ripples
through family systems and it
ripples through communities.
And it can be a little
edgy, so we sometimes
do mediation between
communities and people as well.
So we provide a lot of support.
My wife is an art therapist,
so she does a lot of art
with the people she works with.
So that's another
way that people help
integrate these experiences.
>>SUE: Just so that our viewers
have an understanding of what's
going on, what is this, can you
describe what is DMT for us?
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah.
Dimethyltryptamine
is a plant medicine
that's in thousands and
thousands of different plants.
And it's extracted
and made into brews.
So ayahuasca is something
that people are familiar with.
But it can also be
extracted and smoked.
And it's a very, very
intense experience.
Unlike the other medicines
where you may feel like yourself
or like you're still
here, DMT can propel you
into a space that
feels wholly other,
like an alien landscape, no
sense of identity anymore.
Hyper colorful, hyper
visual, and what
almost appears to be like
a higher dimensional space,
so you see things
morphing and transforming.
And there's also a
deep intelligence
that's present in that space
that feels bigger than us
as well.
So people have
mystical experiences.
They can connect with
entities and allies.
Or they're just in a field of
unity consciousness, oneness.
It's a very, very foreign
experience for most people.
>>SUE: The Gaia
series "Psychedelica"
explored DMT in one
of the episodes.
>> So what exactly are
Dimethyltryptamine's effects
on consciousness?
>> It begins very quickly.
You begin to feel different
within a heartbeat or two
after the completion
of the injection.
There's a feeling
of acceleration
and inner psychic tension
that begins and builds quite
rapidly, almost overwhelmingly.
The visual image of the room,
if you had your eyes open,
would start to break up in a
pixelation kind of pattern.
If your eyes were
closed at that stage,
it's a display of
kaleidoscopic images.
Also during that time is a
high-pitched kind of sound,
usually high-pitch.
Could be oscillating wah
wah wah kind of sound.
Might be some crinkling
kinds of sounds.
But it's increasing
in intensity.
So it's crescendoing,
which kind of
parallels the anxiety or
the feeling of stimulation.
And then you just
break out of your body.
It's as if the internal pressure
just can't be held in the body
anymore, and your
consciousness breaks loose.
And that's kind of the plateau
between your two minutes
and seven minutes or so.
And then you start coming down,
and things slowly recongeal.
>>SUE: Do you agree with
this description of the DMT?
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah.
I'd go even further.
Like you see a kaleidoscope,
but become the unfolding
kaleidoscope.
Something Dr. Strassman
also describes it
as is we have this saying
called it's more real than real,
so the experience itself feels
more real than this reality.
And so it's hard to
describe that to someone,
but that's very common
in people's experiences.
It's like think of it as
like getting in a Star Trek
transporter, and everything
kind of glittering out,
and then you're just in a
completely different space,
or you see a tunnel that you
go through or flying through,
a constantly unfolding
tunnel that takes you
to another place completely.
>>SUE: So you're hoping
to expand consciousness
so that we can integrate,
interpret it, and bring it
into our culture more
effectively, this greater
wisdom.
>>MCQUEEN: Yeah.
Psychedelics have a
strong track record
for bringing in new technology.
Our understanding
of DNA is connected
with people using LSD.
The iPhone, the inspiration
of the iPhone was on LSD.
There's a lot of
technology that's
been developed in conjunction
with the use of psychedelics.
So we're just
trying to figure out
how to create a protocol around
advanced creative problem
solving with it.
>>SUE: Very interesting.
Fabulous.
So how can people find
out more about your work?
>>MCQUEEN: We have a website,
medicinalmindfulness.org.
All of our events
are on there, and how
to start working
with us as a client.
And then we also have
another website called
psychedelicsittersschool.org.
And that's if people are
interested in learning
how to hold space for
others, friends and family,
and then eventually
as a professional.
So we teach people
how to do this work,
and we also are
practitioners ourselves.
>>SUE: Fantastic.
Thank you so much,
Daniel, for being here
and sharing your wisdom,
your understanding,
and your compassion for
humanity with us today.
>>MCQUEEN: Well,
thank you so much.
It was a pleasure
speaking with you today.
>>SUE: Absolutely.
There is much promise in the
work of psychedelic therapists
like Daniel McQueen who are
on the cutting edge of healing
today.
For some of us suffering from
serious psychological concerns,
psychedelic therapy may
be just the protocol
that brings profound personal
growth and much needed relief.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
Thank you for joining
us on "Healing Matrix".